## Agenda: Sep 25 WASI Observe Video call

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: Sep 25 2024, 15:00-15:30 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Caleb Schoepp
  - Email: caleb.schoepp@fermyon.com

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Planning to bring an update of WASI Observe to the subgroup.
1. [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Starting work on a metrics implementation.
1. [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Looking for a list of tracing systems other than OTel.

## Minutes

- [**@scb01**][sb]: Happy to look over slides that you'll bring to the subgroup.
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: I've got a little bit of metrics WIT to share.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: I think that it is ideal for the user to not need to initialize the instrument. It's simpler, and also prevents them from having to pass the instrument around the whole program. We could back it with a simple map of names to instruments in the host. We could provide an option for them to initialize the instrument with a description and unit, but otherwise could just use sane defaults.
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Looking to understand what other tracing systems than OTel and Rust tokio-tracing exist.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: OTel, Jaeger Opentrace (maybe merged into OTel now).
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: If there is significant desire to make WASI Observe super broad than I think we should consider narrowing the scope to be WASI OTel.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: I like the clarity of WASI OTel but I don't like that it would tie us to their pace of iteration.

### Attendees

- [**@scb01**][sb] (Shekar Bommas), Microsoft
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs] (Caleb Schoepp), Fermyon; moderating

### Action items

- [**@calebschoepp**][cs] to add Shekar to meeting invite.
- [**@scb01**][sb] to share draft metrics WIT with Caleb.
- [**@scb01**][sb] to do some research on what other tracing systems there are.

[cs]: https://github.com/calebschoepp
[sb]: https://github.com/scb01
