## Agenda: Jan 31 WASI Observe Video call

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: Feb 14 2024, 16:00-16:30 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Chris Dickinson
  - Email: chris@dylibso.com

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. [Chris Dickinson][chrisdickinson]: WASI Phase 1! Discuss what comes next.
1. [Chris Dickinson][chrisdickinson]: Context param
    - https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-observe/issues/4

## Minutes

- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] we have interest from new folks from the WASI meeting
    - luke from fastly, matthew from f5
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] general reminder
    - please add yourselves to the champions list on the README!
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] we're in phase 1! what does that mean?
    - well, pretty much what we talked about: now we do the work to get to phase 2 (and beyond)
    - practicality, portability, and testing criteria
        - we may need to lean on luke (or others) for more definition on the expectations around portability and testing criteria
    - practicality
        - I'd suggest we start here: I propose we aim for a demo component and host that exercise
          the user stories
            - can we componentize an otel rust app? js? python?
            - how do we test the "vendor can hide the implementation" bit of this?
        - [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend]: we might want to start by having a simple trigger (an incoming wasi-http request) call
          out into the interface directly. It can be tough to navigate the rust tracing even without making significant edits to it.
        - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: Yeah, I'm kind of trying to front-load a question for the registry effort with the "vendor can hide the implementation"
          question -- how does a 3rd party package introduce new host binding requirements?
        - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: do we have any takers on the first demo?
            - [general hesitance]
            - to be clear, this definitely doesn't have to be done before the next meeting
            - this might be a sign we need more info
            - where should the host send observability info to start?
                - [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: jaegar; it's easy to dockerize an entire jaegar stack
                - [**@walther**][walther]: it'd be great to make the demo entirely dockerized & easy to run for demostration purposes
            - [**@walther**][walther]: [CD check me on this! I might have attributed the wrong person]; could we have two components communicate & send spans with latency?
                - [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: once we have one component sending data, it should be straightforward to have two [CD paraphrase!]
                - [**@walther**][walther]: it'd be interesting to pull in some other WASI apis to get a waterfall -- fs, for example?
            - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: okay, so we send the host to jaegar; are there any requirements on the component? language choice?
                - [general agreement that it's implementer's choice]
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: (late join due to coffee mishap); status update
    - working on a full Otel WIT interface
        - it's long -- 100s of lines without doc comments already
        - but on the other hand, it's complete -- it represents events
        - working towards a demo, but time is the constraint
    - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: would you be okay with sharing the WIT file early as an issue?
        - [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: sure!
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: Adding context parameter to span/log functions
    - https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-observe/issues/4
    - [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend]: reconstituting state: are we moving forward with our own logging functions?
    - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: wasi-logging is, as I understand it, kind of floating in space right now. wasi-http/cloud was going to use it
      but opted for stdout/err instead. So they may be amenable to changes / we might be able to help steer it in a direction that's useful for observability purposes.
    - Logging uses a string; but it strikes me that that might be expensive to copy.
        - [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend]: yeah, I think logging went this direction to hedge their bets. I'd like to eventually use a full-fledged type once we have more info.
        - Ideally I think we could get away with an opaque thread id
        - I'd like to look into using a resource, but I'm not totally up on resource use yet.
        - there might be reasons _not_ to use resources -- a parent cannot outlive a child, for example
    - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: do we need to include this context param in the first demo?
        - [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: ideally yes. it won't make much sense to an otel person without it.
- Meeting cadence check
    - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: is 30 minutes / fortnightly okay with folks?
        - [general nodding]

### Attendees

- [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend], Cosmonic
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson], Dylibso; moderating
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes], Fermyon
- [**@walther**][walther]

### Action items

- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson]: Post demo 1 script as PR
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: (in the short-term) Post WIP OTel WIT as issue
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes]: (longer-term, time permitting) Post Otel demo using OTel WIT

[brooksmtownsend]: https://github.com/brooksmtownsend
[endocrimes]: https://github.com/endocrimes
[walther]: https://github.com/walther
[chrisdickinson]: https://github.com/chrisdickinson
