## Agenda: Sep 11 WASI Observe Video call

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: Sep 11 2024, 15:00-15:30 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Caleb Schoepp
  - Email: caleb.schoepp@fermyon.com

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Announce Chris Dickinson stepping down from champion role and Caleb filling in.
1. [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: Talk about current PR for [tracing](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-observe/pull/15).

## Minutes

- [**@scb01**][sb]: It was pretty confusing that there were so many files changed in the PR.
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: I'll split it into two commits.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: We should consider not providing functionality to provide timestamps to start and end. This is simpler and would remove a dependency on wasi clocks.
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: I like removing the dependency but I'm not sure what the other downsides are.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: I'll make this as a question on the PR.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: Everything else looked good to me. Couple minor things I'll raise.
- [**@scb01**][sb]: I think you struck a reasonable balance of mirroring the OTel spec, but not being beholden to it. Maybe some reservations about linking and explicitly setting parents.
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs]: I expect to receive a lot more feedback upstream about how this fits into composition and async with regards to the component model.

### Attendees

- [**@scb01**][sb] (Shekar Bommas), Microsoft
- [**@calebschoepp**][cs] (Caleb Schoepp), Fermyon; moderating

### Action items

- [**@calebschoepp**][cs] to make new meeting invite.
- [**@scb01**][sb] to post comments.

[cs]: https://github.com/calebschoepp
[sb]: https://github.com/scb01
