## Agenda: Jan 31 WASI Observe Video call

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: Jan 31 2024, 16:00-17:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Chris Dickinson
  - Email: chris@dylibso.com

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. [Chris Dickinson]: Discuss design values and goals, starting from the README; are we aligned?
1. [Chris Dickinson]: WASI proposal process: what to expect, upcoming dates, Phase 1 presentation & vote, etc.
1. [Chris Dickinson]: Bookkeeping -- do we want to plan on weekly or fortnightly meetings? Is this time slot okay? Do we want a chat channel someplace?

## Minutes

### Attendees

- [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend], Cosmonic
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson], Dylibso; moderating
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes], Fermyon
- [**@walther**][walther]

### Action items

- [**@brooksmtownsend**][brooksmtownsend] to PR a user story for supporting automatic component instrumentation.
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] to reach out to wasi-logging to see if we can help with that effort
- [**@endocrimes**][endocrimes] to look into surveying tracing functionality.
- open action item: investigate adding context parameter to `span-{enter,exit,tags}`.
    - [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] to file an issue so we can start a discussion
- [**@chrisdickinson**][chrisdickinson] to schedule the next meeting (same time / day of week)

[brooksmtownsend]: https://github.com/brooksmtownsend
[endocrimes]: https://github.com/endocrimes
[walther]: https://github.com/walther
[chrisdickinson]: https://github.com/chrisdickinson
